---
layout: post
title: On tests
date: 2013-10-18 10:48:31
disqus: n
---

Years ago I was introduced to TDD and BDD. At first, just like with when discovering object oriented languages (coming from C) I could not really understand how to use it.
Nowadays I almost can't write code without tests. Of course sometimes I would need to check an idea by writing some quick lines, but even in such a case I would start by writing tests.

Many would tell you "tests are there to check that you do not break your app when refactoring". I believe this is just a side effect of the main positive point : sorting ideas in your head.

When written before code tests are a way to help you decipher an emerging idea in your head, much like doing gross cuts in the clay to get a basic shape out of the block. You can write several tests steps, each describing part of the story you want to tell. Then, writing code to make those tests pass you just have to follow the outline, adding details and material to it.

When written after the actual code (when a bug has been discovered) the tests allow you to wrap your mind around the problem, fiddling around to reproduce what someone reported you get a better understanding of what is failing, and what need to be fixed. Once again, once the outline is done, you just have to follow it to write the solution and make the tests pass.

I often hear people (including my past self) saying that we don't have time to write tests, but in reality you don't have time to do something else. Rushing in the code is similar to jumping from a plane and then wondering if you can fly.
This week I closed up a nice refactor another senior Ruby developer of the team had started before going away for a week. Both of us missed the fact that our refactor totally missed a controller. We had refactored 3 already, we spotted breaking tests in a forth one so we knew that one needed love too, yet a fifth one had no tests (courtesy of the history of the app) and so those missing tests never broke.
The application did suffer from a (luckily) minor error on that controller. I wrote a test to reproduce the bug, then wrote code to fix it. Two hours and several builds later the app was deployed again.

Two years ago I would have probably been responsible for such missing tests, but several friends, coworkers, mentors of sorts and my experience have taught me otherwise.

Today tests are :

1. Of great help to sort out my ideas and sketch the outline of a feature
2. A way to reproduce and outline bugs
3. A part of my apps and gems, just like the models or controllers

That's why I am often surprised to hear from young developers still in University that they don't learn about tests.

:leaves:
