---
layout: post
title: Artifice
date: 2013-11-27 10:48:31
disqus: n
---

In the quest for speedy test and nomadic development we want to be able to fake any kind of transaction between our code and the remote world.

There is the excellent VCR which allows to record and replay transactions, but sometimes you want a scalpel instead of chainsaw.

Recently I had hands in a project where someone had used Artifice to do what I usually do with Fakeweb. I was quite intrigued as Artifice is from Wycats, aka Yehuda Katz.

Fakeweb has an easy syntax but it tends to do a catchall all around your tests and this can have terrible effects. When I added Fakeweb to the current tests I overlooked Artifice because the only test using it did look pretty bad. Turn out it's more linked to developer's skills rather than Artifice.

When we realised Fakeweb was breaking other tests we decided to remove it and update the tests accordingly. Since I was the one who let the beast in I was the one who had to cleanup the mess.

Artifice's code resides at Github : https://github.com/wycats/artifice. The last commit on master is (at this moment) 7 months old, and there is a couple of issues waiting. Yet it's worth the try mostly because it does not bleed all over your tests, it can only concern a couple of calls in few tests without impacting anything else.

I found the README a bit limited and in the end I was happy to checkout the (even badly written) previous test to get a simple understanding. Here is a short version on how we use it.

You first define a *Proc* :

```
artifice_proc = proc do |env|
  [200, {'Content-Type' => 'text/plain' }, ["some text"]]
end
```

This will be used as data to respond with proper http code (200 here), a content type header and actual content (the last element of the array).

Then you can activate Artifice by passing the previous proc, add a domain to catch **any** request to it. The requests will be answered with the previously described canned response. And then there is a last line to deactivate Artifice :

```
Artifice.activate_for(artifice_proc, 'www.example.com')
subject.make_calls
Artifice.deactivate
```

If you want to respond differently depending on the *request_path* you can use a case on *ENV['PATH_INFO']* in your proc. Each *when* entry will be a different path and you can different canned answers each time :

```
case_proc = proc do |env|
  response1 = [200, {'Content-Type' => 'text/plain' }, ["some text"]]
  response2 = [404, {'Content-Type' => 'text/plain' }, ["wrong"]]

  request_path = env["PATH_INFO"]
  data = case request_path
    when /\/foo/
      response1
    when /\/bar/
      response2
    end
end
```

## Some ideas

It might look odd like this but if you write nice helpers around the activation of Artifice and store the canned responses cleanly you could see those as a kind of fixtures for external APIs or services. I can easily think of something similar to factories or blueprints to add a canned service response with 1 or 3 lines in a describe.

## Epilogue

Tools like Fakeweb and VCR are very useful yet they had a lot of weight and complexity around the tests. Fakeweb tend to be difficult to limit and VCR tend to be a pain to keep offline and replay often changing paths.

Artifice is surgical but requires some time to prepare and write the proper canned answers you need. It might not be the ideal thing to mock a complete REST API for your gem but it might be a nice way to mock the one or two calls you make to Github or NewRelic ?
