---
layout: post
title: On style
date: 2013-09-21 10:48:31
disqus: n
---

It's now September 2013, to me August is very special because it marks the anniversary of my first paid work. It was in 1999, in my father's company. It was a very simple work : setting up servers and terminals with operating software and a set of configuration. It has been 14 years.

Along those 14 years I have been lucky to cross the path of some talented people to learn from them and also experience on my own.

Having been in contact with a lot of C developers early I grew accustomed to the need to stick to a set of semi rigid rules to write code.

When I discovered RubyOnRails, I also discovered TDD and while at first I saw it as something that would slow me down, I grew to like it.

In the last 5 years the following guidelines have been present in my daily routine :

1. Write tests first
2. Write simple code in small blocks
3. Stick to the style guide
4. Refactor with no hesitation
5. Commit Early, Branch Often, Rebase as Needed

## Write tests first

You will find tons of good articles explaining why, yet to me it all falls down to putting the problem you are solving down to words, splitting it into small steps. This is a mind trick : it allows you to understand the problem better and then to have a clearer idea of what kind of solution you can write.

The safety line tests provides are mearly a byproduct of this process. (important none the less).


## Write simple code in small blocks

I like the Unix's "one tool to do one thing and do it well" which is transcribed as the "single responsability" principle (As far as I understand it) in the developer culture.

It's an easy and good rule to stick with when writing classes, methods, etc .. It keeps methods small and classes simple.


## Stick to the style guide

Style guides are the way to ensure that 2 two developers do write the same language.

## Refactor with no hesitation

Code duplication, bad syntax and other smells are orcs waiting in the dark : they will get you at night, when you are busy with something else. And then it will hurt, a lot.

Like the elves and dwarves walking towards the enemy lines on the battlefields : refactor those smells with no hesitation. It might hurt a bit initially but adding tests and refactoring a smell will save you hours later, if not your health.


## Commit Early, Branch Often, Rebase as Needed

A previous post of mine, published on Coderwall ([Git is Cheap](https://coderwall.com/p/wxowig) ~42k views !) describes this in details. Yet the basic idea is goes hand in hand with steps 1 and 2 : each test you write and then make go green with appropriate code is a reason to commit. Later on, refactor. Still will also serve as stepping stones to review your code before pushing it.

Branching often requires proper slicing of features : not too small and not too big. A topic branch will be a couple of commits long. This will allow you to rebase the master or development branch anytime with it. And this is key to avoid conflicts.

Rebasing interactively your commits before pushing (squashing, rewording) allows you to provide clean, simple, easy to read commit diffs and message. That is key to code review : your reviewers need to be able to read your diff in very little time. A reviewer task is to compare the goal (in the original issue), the tests (describing the feature), and the code (implementing the feature). It should be easy, and swift to do so.
Commit messages and Pull Request desciription with proper description of the issue or feature, and commit guiding ideas are important. Otherwise the reviewer work is limited to a quick syntax check and checking if the tests are not broken.

## Epilogue

I am now lucky to be part of a team where everyday we go through those steps. Everyday I learn a bit more about those steps and how to do them properly. So far, either in this team or the previous ones those steps have literraly saved my health.
