---
layout: post
title: The shave
date: 2015-01-24 12:20:00
disqus: n
---

Shaving your face is an almost daily ritual for most adult men. In western countries the last 30 to 40 years have seen the rise of plenty of inventions to make that ritual easy, better, etc … Are they really useful ?

I have an odd personal relationship with shaving. It’s one of those skills I had to learn on my own. One day I decided I had enough of that odd white cotonish felt on my jaws and decided to grab a razor, some shaving foam and go with it. I turned to my father and he just told me to “shave” after asking me if I was sure that I wanted to do so. Apparently it’s so easy and obvious that every man is supposed to figure it out.

And so I did. Fast forward 10 or 15 years I did not learn much more about shaving. I did painfully learn how to handle a razor to avoid cuts. I also learnt that the super razors with 2, 3 or up to 5 blades are not helping much at all. With those you need to shave daily. You don’t want any kind of build up of the hair that would just block the blades after a couple of strokes.

Since I am not required to be cleanly shaved daily I tend to wait one or two days in between shaves. As a consequence my super razors would survive maybe one week or two and I would have a terrible shave.

A friend told me he uses an electric razor. Full of confidence that technology is often a good solution I turned to those. I bought a not so cheap electric razor. I quickly discovered that while the one I got is easy to keep clean and use it’s not so good at giving you a very clean shave as I had to use a hand razor to get a clean finish.

## The razor story

As I moved to London I got access to a whole new world of barber shops and shaving material. I granted myself a couple of wet towel shaves in a few places with very different results. The price for those are usually high and while you do end up with a very clean shave you also tend to get a few cuts and two days later you need to repeat the procedure.

A friend told me that he only uses double edged razors and that it works quite well for him. It got me thinking. I like to look into subjects properly to understand them so I decided to look into the why and how we got this state of things in shaving.

While the straight edge razor is simple and efficient it requires a lot of care before, during and after the shave. It’s also super dangerous to use. So at some point someone figured out a way to shave using smaller, affordable blades. It ended up as what we know as Double Edged razors : a very slim piece of metal (usually stainless steel) at the top of a T shaped handle.

The double edged razors are quite good at what they do, but it’s still easy to cut yourself, and the blades are dangerous to handle. Yet they are simple, patent free and available everywhere.

In the 1970s blade companies started to sell razors with cartridge embedded blades. In the following 20 years several iterations were made around the concept ending up with what we know today as the 3 to 6 blades based cartridges. They are proprietary things, expensive and non compatible between makers.

Once I had learn all that I figured I had not much to loose but to try one. So I looked where I could get one online with a couple of blades and some shaving soap. I waited patiently the arrival of the package while looking at my hair grow on my face.

While a bit scared I did find shaving with the DE razor very easy and faster than it is with those plastic super razors. Instead of 3 strokes I just needed 1 and the blade was easy to clean.

## In the end

Three months have passed, I still shave with the DE razor. I invested in a couple of small hand towels to prepare and clean my face before and after the shave in the meantime. Using very hot water before and very cold water after with the towel do make the experience a bit nicer and enjoyable.
Beside those towels and a good shaving soap in a wooden bowl I don’t need anything else but a stock of blades. For travel I have a smaller plastic boxed soap and I do carry the whisk with me but I could as well just do with a cream. If I need to fly I can get a few blades in a local place without trouble and at limited cost.

The amount of waste produced is way smaller, I only have to handle the blades once per month and it’s only metal, no plastic.

The quality and ease of the shave are way better than with the plastic ones or even the few high end plastic cartridge ones I have used in the past. I spend clearly far less time shaving too : it’s clean, fast and pleasant.

## Sharing the thoughts

That post is an odd ball, I am more into software development and cooking than shaving but I wanted to share my experience and thoughts on the topic. After those 3 months I can’t help but wonder how we have let the big companies sell us those plastic or electric razors that are clearly not efficient. I understand there is basically one type of beard per man but surely, such a simple technology as DE razors can accommodate a lot of us that use those throwable plastic things ?

There is a bonus. For those of us who have seen our grandpas shaving with those old razors and shaving soap bowls these DE razors and smells send us back in time ...
