---
layout: post
title: Ergodoxed
date: 2015-01-08 22:27:31
disqus: n
---

After much thinking about it I decided to buy myself a mechanical keyboard. But I did not want to go with a regular one either. After all I am quite happy about my laptop keyboard.

An ergodox is a split form factor and that is supposed to help preventing some of the issues involved with the position inflicted upon yourself by the ridiculous width of the keyboard compared to the one of your shoulders.

The other big bonus of the ergodox and other mechanical keyboards is the use of a custom firmware allowing any one to tweak the behavior of each key. It also allows to configure multiple layers of custom configuration. You can then switch directly from qwerty to dvorak in one keystroke. More interestingly you can also use less keys than a class keyboard and assign usefull but less used keys to some of the layers.

While soldering and putting everything together was fun I quickly grew grumpy about knowing upon which layer I am typing. There are several posts here and there talking about how to do it, here is my version of the ergodox firmware with the little changes allowing to use two of the three diodes to show the current layer.

- off off : layer 0 (default)
- on off : layer 1 (functions keys and volume control)
- off on : layer 2 (teensy button and numpad)

The [repo](https://github.com/mcansky/ergodox-firmware/tree/custom_leds) is on github , all the changes are included in one commit it is not really big.
